---
title: "Cruising Blues"
layout: post
---

Completing my series of posts about Robert Pirsig's
[Zen and the Art of motorcycle Maintenance][zen] ([1], [2], [3]), here's a
fantastic expert from an article of Pirsig, titled
[Cruising Blues and Their Cure] and published in Esquire in 1977.

[zen]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zen_and_the_Art_of_Motorcycle_Maintenance

[1]: /stuckness-and-understanding
[2]: /peace-of-mind
[3]: /gumption-arete

[Cruising Blues and Their Cure]: http://www.moq.org/forum/Pirsig/cruisingblues.html

----

Virtue here comes from childhood reading about the old days of sailing ships
when young men were sent to sea to learn manliness and virtue. I remember being
skeptical about this. "How could a monotonous passage across a pile of water
produce virtue?" I wondered. I figured that maybe a few bad storms would scare
hell out of the young men and this would make them humble and manly and virtuous
and appreciative of life ever afterward, but it seemed like a dubious
curriculum. There were cheaper and quicker ways to scare people than that.

Now, however, with a boat of my own and some time at sea, I begin to see the
learning of virtue another way. It has something to do with the way the sea and
sun and wind and sky go on and on day after day, week after week, and the boat
and you have to go on with it. You must take the helm and change the sails and
take sights of the stars and work out their reductions and sleep and cook and
eat and repair things as they break and do most of these things in stormy
weather as well as fair, depressed as well as elated, because there's no choice.
You get used to it; it becomes habit-forming and produces a certain change in
values. Old gear that has been through a storm or two without failure becomes
more precious than it was when you bought it because you know you can trust it.
The same becomes true of fellow crewmen and ultimately becomes true of things
about yourself. Good first appearances count for less than they ever did, and
real virtue - which comes from an ability to separate what merely looks good
from what lasts and the acquisition of those characteristics in one's self - is
strengthened.

Self-discovery is as much a philosopher's imponderable as reality, but when one
takes away the external stimuli of civilization during long ocean hours at the
helm far from any land, and particularly on overcast nights, every cruising
sailor knows that what occurs is not an evening of complete blankness. Instead
comes a flow of thought drawn forth by the emptiness of the night. Occurrences
of the previous day, meager as they may have been, rise and are thought about
for a while, and then die away to return again later, a little less compelling,
and perhaps another time even weaker, until they die away completely and are not
thought of again. Then older memories appear, of a week past, a month past, of
years past, and these are thought about and sometimes interrelated with new
insights. A problem that has been baffling in the past is now understood
quickly. New ideas for things seem to pop up from nowhere because the rigid
patterns of thought that inhibited them are now weakened by emptiness and
depression. Then in time these new thoughts wear town too, and the empty night
dredges deeper into the subconscious to tug at, loosen and dislodge old
forgotten thoughts that were repressed years ago. Old injustices that one has
had to absorb, old faces now gone, ancient feelings of personal doubt, remorse,
hatred and fear, are suddenly loose and at you. You must face them again and
again until they die away like the thoughts preceding them. This self that one
discovers is in many ways a person one would not like one's friends to know
about; a person one may have been avoiding for years, full of vanity, cowardice,
boredom, self-pity, laziness, blamingness, weak when he should be strong,
aggressive when he should be gentle, a person who will do anything not to know
these things about himself - the very same fellow who has been having problems
with cruising depression all this time. I think it's in the day-after-day,
week-after-week confrontation of this person that the most valuable learning of
virtue takes place.
