---
title: Reviews 8
layout: post
---

Previously: [One] / [Two] / [Three] / [Four] / [Five] / [Six] / [Seven]

[One]: /every-anime/
[Two]: /more-anime/
[Three]: /even-more-anime/
[Four]: /reviews-4
[Five]: /reviews-5
[Six]: /reviews-6
[Seven]: /reviews-7

## Tower of God (Anime)

![](tower-of-god.jpg)

I somehow forgot to review this next time, even though it's one of the show I
enjoyed the most of the last batch.

It's an adaptation of one of the most popular [webtoon manhwa]. I'd read the
start of it a while ago (covering much more than this first anime season).

I can say it's a faithful adaptation which works really well. I feel like the
anime medium has the potential to clarify some stuff that is not always very
clear in the manhwa. They probably will have to simplify things a little in the
future (and maybe they already have, but things are simple enough so far that
it's impercetible).

The anime spurred me to reread the manhwa. Actually, to read most of the
published stuff for the first time — it's still being published and my first
read through was a while back. Since I just finished it, I'm going to say more
about the manhwa immediately. You can just assume everything transposes to the
anime as well.

Needless to say, highly recommended.

[webtoon manhwa]: https://www.webtoons.com/en/challenge/kennycomics-webtoon-101/whats-webtoonmangamanhwamanhua/viewer?title_no=5956&episode_no=8

## Tower of God (Webtoon - up to episode 485)

After staying vague in the anime description, it's probably fair that I tell you
a bit more about the story.

The story centers around Bam, a boy that seemingly lived his whole life so far
in some sort of huge cave, in company of a girl called Rachel (that you will
soon come to hate). The story starts as Rachel is pulled off into "the tower",
shortly followed by Bam — who is determined to find Rachel.

The tower is a whole universe, subdivided into floors, which are whole worlds
onto themselves. It is moreover subdivided between the outer tower - which is
just a collection of plain old worlds where people live, and the inner tower,
where a select few are called. Usually, people are called into the inner tower
from the outer tower, in which case they are called "regulars". Their goal is to
climb the tower. Reaching the top seemingly makes one's dream come true — or
something — but it requires powering up massively along the way in order to keep
up with the competition. Climbing itself is achieved by passing tests (elaborate
games that typically involve fighting) on each floor. Very rarely, people from
outside the tower manage to enter the inner tower and climb (like Bam and
Rachel) — these are called irregulars.

The strenght of the story, in my opinion, lies in the vast (very vast) crew of
colorful and interesting characters that each come with their own background and
motivations, and are deftly woven into the story.

A comparison that I find apt is that *Tower of God* is a bit like *A Song of Ice
and Fire* (the *Game of Thrones* books): it too has a ton of characters that
jump in a out of the story, and complex motivations and relationships between
the characters. I find that too often anime/manga proceed in fixed "arcs" where
you get to face the villain du jour with today's allies, which are quickly
forgotten about. No so in *Tower of God*.

It's not quite *Game of Thrones* either. For one, there is much less dialogue
between characters where they expose their motivations and share their life
philosophy. Most of that comes in the form of flashbacks (though oftgen
occasionally be narrated flashbacks). There are a few more quiet passages where
character really "converse" about their feeling (as opposed to just trading
information without accompanying emotional/philosophical sense-making), so the
author can write them, but they are relatively few and far between.

In fact, in my opinion is that the writing gets a bit weaker towards the end of
the currently published episodes, as the stakes expand. The story focuses less
on floor tests and more on grandiose fights. Yet, games with complex ruleset is
one of the story main's shticks, and the author finds a way to reintroduce them
in the forms of various bets that the characters make to settle their
differences. That feels a bit clumsy to me.

Another issue is that while the characters are the great strength of the story,
there are simply too many of them. Most of them are interesting and could have
their own story, but unfortunately, breadth comes at the expense of depth. It at
times feel like we get to meet a character, learn part of his backstory, see him
fight, and then he is forgotten.

Some of the early "main" characters that felt like a big part of the story
haven't been seen in more than 150 episodes at this point.

The pace is rather fast, and it's fair to say that the webtoon is a page-turner
(or rather, a panel-scroller). It's gotten me to neglect my sleep more so than
usual a few times.

If I had to make another criticism to the manhwa, is that it's sometimes a
bit hard to follow. In particular, games tend to have quite intricate rules —
which I'm all for, but they aren't explained very clearly. I often realize
partway that I misinterpreted the intent of the rules. You'd think that drawings
would help, but alas very often it doesn't. The drawing are not especially
confusing (except sometimes during fights), but they don't help that much. Also
— and funnily enough — since at some points there are so damn many characters
around, the author does not always draw all of them. That leads to some weird
situations where you suddenly realize "oh, that guy was there all along".

But anyhow, I find Tower of God amazing and grandiose, and I strongly recommend
you give it a look. [Read it online here.][tog]

[tog]: https://www.webtoons.com/en/fantasy/tower-of-god/list?title_no=95&page=1

## Perry Mason

The new Perry Mason show's [trailer] got me really hyped.

[trailer]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_5O3cMmg3JQ

The character is reprised from the mythical [50's TV Show][perry-wiki], which
has already undergone quite a few reboots since then. In this case, it's an
origin story.

[perry-wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perry_Mason

The first episode, which I watched with my girlfriend, left us both thoroughly
nonplussed. And we left it at that. Live on the hype, die on the hype.

## Hellsing Ultimate

I had in the back of my mind that Hellsing was a classic, and I ought to see
some. There are two versions adapting the original manga: an anime, and a series
of 1-hour-long OVAs called Hellsing Ultimate. Similarly to Fullmetal Alchemist,
the first (anime) version diverged to the (at the time unfinished manga), while
Ultimate is faithful to the source material. The general sentiment on the
internet was that Ultimate was by far superior.

But I ended up seeing only one of the episodes, which managed to bore me
thoroughly.

I think this is a show about the aesthetics. Since I haven't mentionned anything
of the show yet: it's about vampires. And two secretive organizations fighting the
surnatural and one another. And gore.

To clarify, by *aethestics*, I mean the mood of the modern-yet-gothic setting, not the
art and animation which don't strike me as particularly something.

So if vampires are you think, go for it. But I think that even if you have to
throw the story to the wind, the new [Castlevania] anime is far superior,
mood-wise, if you like vampires.

[Castlevania]: /reviews-6/#castlevania-all-3-seasons

## Fire Force S2

I've done quite a reversal on this one from [my season 1 review][ff1].
I dropped it after 3 episodes. It's not that it was bad per se, but rather my
time was getting rather limited, and I just found this to be the worst of the
anime I was watching.

[ff1]: /reviews-5/#enen-no-shouboutai-fire-force

There were a couple things that informed my decisions. First, these three
episodes were relatively filler heavy. But when they weren't they just added
more seemingly disparate strands in the story. I would expect it to go
into a bit more depth in the characters and explore their relationships, or
explore the revelations from last seasons. Instead, new elements are pilled on
top.

Having many balls in the air is not necessarily a bad thing — see Game of
Thrones (the books and the book-inspired seasons) for an example of how to do
that masterfully. But it is bad if it comes at the expense of depth. Here I have
the feeling that many of the introduced side-players are not ultimately relevant
to the storyline. This is not an intricate inter-woven story, but rather a
straightforward story that keeps stalling by adding side-cast and side-stories.

To be fair, this should still be fairly entertaining, but it just didn't make
the cut this time.

## Kaguya-sama: Love is War Season 2

Not much to add to [my review of season][kaguya1], this is still great. In fact,
I was surprised that they managed to keep the formula so fresh.

[kaguya1]: /reviews-7/#kaguya-sama-love-is-war

I get the feeling that the people writing this are quite clever. It's not easy
to balance the line between running gag (a big component of the humor) and
unexpected, funny development.

Story-wise, the relationship manages to both progress and stay in the same
place, which is quite an achievement.

I'm quite curious to see what they have in store for season 3.

## The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up (Marie Kondo)

This is a [super famous book][kondo-gr] on a tidying method that famously
preaches getting rid of anything that "does not spark joy". It even spawned a
[Netflix series][kondo-nf].

[kondo-gr]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/22318578-the-life-changing-magic-of-tidying-up
[kondo-nf]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WvyeapVBLWY

I'm pretty organized, and also pretty sympathetic with what I'd heard about it.
But the real reason I read it is because my girlfriend is a fan. I didn't
actually _read_ it. I listened to the Audiobook. It's fairly short: about 4.5hrs
— less if you speed it up.

I'd actually read quite a few things about this a few years ago, most notably
[this nice article][kondo-raptitude], but I also perused some summaries you can
find on the net, such as [this one][kondo-summary]. So actually listening to the
book didn't really learn me anything.

[kondo-raptitude]: https://www.raptitude.com/2015/07/out-of-sight/
[kondo-summary]: http://www.actionablebooks.com/en-ca/summaries/the-life-changing-magic-of-tidying-up/

Which didn't mean it was all that uninteresting. Marie Kondo is quite the
character. I'm a major nerd, but I was at time slightly creeped out by the depth
of her obsession with tidying. I also was surprised that she seemed quite
superstitutions and ... pop-spiritual? I know she's a Japanese woman, but that
seemed too easy of a stereotype. It's not just for the sake of the original
audience either — the woman does talk to her clothes and to her house, after
all. Not my jam, but ultimately just a funny detail.

What the book also tries — and achieves — is selling the cleaned-up lifestyle.
Kondo goes to great length to paint a nice picture of your life in a clean,
zen-like environment, where you can enjoy a hot cup of tea (or your beverage of
choice) surrounded only by those objects you love.

There is a lot of advice in the book (it's quite actionable), but what I
personally got out of it was a bit of motivation to sort out my stuff a bit
more.

## FLCL

I didn't know much about FLCL (pronounced Fooly Cooly) going in, except that it
was well regarded, and that it had [great music] by The Pillows.

[great music]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qAE8c7NcO7Q&list=PL5PW5TdgaMATZV3Z3_zhsj3V-Mu6e3owr

It was ... not what I expected. It's completely crazy, opaque, and quite
incomprehensible. Ok, to be fair, you kinda follow along, it's just that the
plot is not intended to really make sense, as is clearly stated during a couple
of 4th-wall breaks.

Still, it's entertaining, by virtue of being an unrelenting assault on the
senses. It feels like each episode is a fan edit of a whole 4-6 episodes arc
that actually makes sense into a single ultra-condensed episode.

What surprised me when writing this review is how old this anime actually is.
It's from 2000 - 20 years old. Yet it looks so modern. I pulled the page for
Gainax (the studio) and they published [this][gainax-1999] the year before, and
[that][gainax-2001] the year after. FLCL must really have looked like an OVNI,
it's no wonder it made such a splash.

[gainax-1999]: https://myanimelist.net/anime/276/Mahoromatic__Automatic_Maiden
[gainax-2001]: https://myanimelist.net/anime/276/Mahoromatic__Automatic_Maiden

It not only looks modern, but also sounds modern. At least it's as out there
today as it was back then — though we probably are more accustomed to "out
there" things today.

So, I understand why it's a classic. I'm pretty happy to have seen it. It's very
short (6 regular-sized episodes), which helps to make it go down easy. I don't
think I would say it was a good anime, but it was quite an experience which I'm
unlikely to forget. For some, that's what it means to be good.

## The Good Place Seasons 2, 3 & 4

![](good-place.jpg)

Previously: [Season 1][goods1]

The good place keeps entertaining! I wondered how they would keep things going
and entertaining after the big twist at the end of season 1, but they managed
brilliantly.

Without spoiling too much, season 2 features a lot of character development for
one particular character in a way that really adds to the dynamic of our little
group.

Season 3 quite different from the previous one, as it's the first one taking
place mostly on earth. It's also a bit more disjointed as the original "plan"
gets disrupted midway. All in all, a good job in keeping the charm without
exhausting the concept.

I did actually have again a pretty large gap (two months or so?) between season
2 and 3, and it was a pleasure to come back to it.

Season 4 was pleasant too. I felt like the start was maybe a bit weaker, but the
enjoyment is still there.

The show is frequently concerned with philosophical questions, but the end was I
think the most interesting stab at this in the series. In term of watching
experience, I love it. But as far as the philosophy is concerned, I hate it. Let
me discuss it being a spoiler tag.

<div class=spoiler>

<p>So the final arc of the good place is concerned with the idea of immortality,
and eternal boredom. Basically, everyone in the real good place is bored out of
their minds. The solution the protagonis come up with is simple: let people die
for real (no afterlife), whenever they chose to.</p>

<p>In principle, this is a good solution. I'm generally pro-freedom, people
shouldn't be forced to live, especially forever (no quoting out of context: we
should make effort to keep depressive people alive here in the real world). But
also, nobody should be forced to die, and the solution leaves open the
possibility to live forever.n</p>

<p>I worry however, that the philosophical message being carried is all wrong.
If I had to summarize it would be something like "life is worth living only
because it ends". One of my controversial opinion (though really, I don't think
it should be) is that we should strive to live forever, i.e. fight the disease
known as aging. This <a
href="https://www.nickbostrom.com/fable/dragon.html">parable</a> is an excellent
introduction if you're not familiar with the idea (there's also <a
href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cZYNADOHhVY">a narrated/illustrated
version</a>).</p>

<p>I just don't think that I'd ever get bored if I were to live forever. The
truth is that the world moves faster than we can apprehend. There are constantly
new <emph>interesting</emph> things happening. I'm interesting in so many things
that I will never have time to investigate, but worse: the mass of interesting
things grows faster than my ability to investigate them. The idea that
everything is just repeating is popular, but it's jaded cynicism. I still enjoy
learning new things about topics I'm an expert in. Your favorite game is never
boring if you haven't played it in a while. The idea that super long lifetimes
would be boring is just a sad failure of the imagination.</p>

<p>I really thing "death makes life worth living" is more of a cope than
anything else, because in the current state of things we are all destined to
die. It does make one feel better than our currently unavoidable death is
somehow meaningful. Unfortunately, this has the side-effect of generating anger
towards people fighting the good fight against aging. It shouldn't be so - aging
is the number one cause of mortality. People typically talk a big game, but it
seems to me that nobody that's not greatly in pain (mentally or physically) ever
chooses to voluntarly end his own life. If given the choice, everybody that
isn't tremendously suffering will choose to live another day, every single
day.</p>

<p>Enough about the philosophy. I said that despite this, the final arc was
great. It is, because — you guessed it — most of the characters eventually
decide to die, and the idea is executed gracefully, providing an emotional
payload that is only appropriate for the season finale. I don't think I can say
much more than that.</p>

</div>

[goods1]: /reviews-4/#the-good-place-season-1

## Re:Zero Season 2 (Part 1)

Previously: [Season 1](https://norswap.com/even-more-anime/#rezero)

I had big expectations ... and it's too early to tell if they will be met or
not. Season 3 certainly kicks off fast & hard, and difficulties and mysteries
keep piling on ... and on ... and on. What's going on?

Past what I would say is the "introduction" of the season, the arc becomes very
unusual because (1) the number of variables seemingly keep increasing all the
time, and (2) it doesn't have a proper ending!

The decision to cut off the season in two parts, with the break before the arc
could find a resolution, seems very questionable to me.

It's not that the setup is bad — mostly it is excellent. It's that the timing is
deplorable. The show builds up tension for 10 weeks, and then goes on hiatus for
months. Chance is we won't remember all the ball that are in the air when part 2
comes around. And there are now more balls in the air than ever.

Also while the setup is excellent, it's hard to offer commentary on the arc
without knowing its resolution. A crappy resolution could make the setup
worthless, while a good one will sublimate it.

If you haven't seen this yet, my advice would be to wait and watch it only
shortly before part 2 comes around.

## Deca-Dence

If you go into Deca-Dence blind, the second episodes yield a pretty unexpected
twist (read at your own risk).

Deca-Dence is an original story (not an adaptation). Earth is now a sort of
post-apocalyptic MMORPG entertainment park for androids living in a space
station. The last humans live the mobile fortress Deca-Dence, which they mostly
maintain, while android log into human-looking avatars to fight the
post-apocalyptic monsters that threathen them. But the humans are not aware of
all this.

Mostly, Deca-dence is okay. The story is good but not great, so are the
characters. It's above average without really shining.

I'm not a fan of the pseudo-chibi style used to depict the androids. I think it
might have been selected in part to reduce cost and speed up production, but it
adds nothing artistically speaking (and I just don't like how it looks).

Lukewarm recommendation.

## The God of High School

![](god-of-highschool.png)

This anime gets my award for worst-named anime of the year. No high school is
actually featured, and the protagonist neither look nor act like they're high
school students (more like 20-somethings).

Okay, this is really the *anime*'s fault. This is actually an adaptation of a
[webtoon manhwa] of the same name, made in collaboration with CrunchyRoll, just
like [Tower of God]. And this time too, it's one of the most popular manhwa on
[webtoons.com].

Let's get it out of the way: the story isn't really brilliant. The titular "Gof
of Highschool" is actually a free-style everything-allowed mixed-martial-arts
tournament (powered by convenient nanobots that can heal almost any wounds).

The early season is heavy on flashbacks that flesh out the personality of
the main characters and also various other secondary characters. It's not
exactly subtle, but mostly it works.

Partway, it is revealed that most of the stronger participants use "charyeok" to
draw on the power of some kinds of spirits/divinity — because eh, why the hell
not? It's almost funny how everyone takes it in stride that some fighters have
basically magical powers.

Indeed, God of Highschool doesn't really bother to avoid straining credibility.
Surprisingly, this ends up working to its advantage. While fights start
innocuous enough, they escalate to ridiculous over-the-top mystically-powered
world-threatening WTF-inducing affairs by the end of the season. And it works.

Being more of a story guy, I didn't expect to enjoy this so much, but enjoy it I
did.

[Tower of God]: #tower-of-god
[webtoons.com]: https://www.webtoons.com/en/

## Rent-a-Girlfriend (Kanojo, Okarishimasu)

This "harem" anime was popular this summer, but I'm going to give it a "meh".

The plot is simple: main guy Kazuya uses a girlfriend-for-rental service to go
on a date with main girl Mizuhara. Accidentally they get introduced to each
other's grandmothers and have to keep the pretense up to keep them happy.

The main problem with the show is the cast. Mizuhara is probably the best of the
lot, in a harsh-but-secretely-kind way, though there's nothing incredible about
the characterization. The other girls thouh... you have a psychopath, an
*extremely* overly attached girl, and a girl that appears in  a single episode
(all four being proeminently featured in the OP and ED). As for Kazuya... let's
just say he makes Shinji "just get into the robot" from [Evangelion] look like a
paragon of bravery and poise.

On the other hand, the character designs are pretty cool. But still meh.

[Evangelion]: /every-anime/#neon-genesis-evangelion

## Hunter x Hunter 2011 (14 episodes)

I only watched the start of this, on a couple of recommendations.

Here are my opinions after the first 14 episodes, or about half of the
26-episodes first arc of the series.

I watched this on a couple recommendations, but I'm conflicted about it. It's a
sympathetic show, but it hasn't given too much reason to care so far.

What surprised me most about it is that the version about it is from 2011. It
feels more like a Pokemon-era anime, or even Dragon Ball-era. This can probably
be explained from the fact that it's an adaptaiton of a 1998 manga, and also the
reboot of a 1999 anime series. I'm wondering if it would have been possible to
impart a slightly more "modern" flair to the series (not that the vintage style
detracts).

The main issue I have with the series so far is that it's quite slow. It's not
*quite* filler, but there are quite a few episodes that could be easily
compressed to half the time without losing much. It's not so much about useless
plot as about timing — scenes just seem to linger a bit (or for some, a lot)
longer than they should.

I've also been told the first arc is not the best, so I might give it another
shot, but I think I'll give some other animes a chance in the meantime.

## Kuragehime (Princess Jellyfish)

![](kuragehime.jpg)

This is one of my girlfriend Sasha's favorite anime. And what can I say, the
lady's got good taste.

I'm struggle to explain why this is good. It's [josei], so admittedly not the
genre I'm the most familiar with. I think mostly it comes done to great loveable
dorky characters, and impeccable timing that never leaves you bored nor makes you
feel hurried.

The show is about a sisterhood of major lady nerds (each nerding on a very
specific topic). Things are shaken up a little bit when a stylish lady enters
their lives and the future of their shared housing is threathened. The story is
a solid driver, but isn't going to have you gripping the edge of your seat.
Again, you're going to be watching this for the characters.

There is one short season (11 episodes), forming an incomplete adaptation of a
longer manga series. It stops at a logical place, but quite clearly the story is
far from over.

[josei]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josei_manga

## Tenet

I've enjoy all of Nolan's film that I've seen, and this one was no exception.

Like many of Nolan's film, it features a complicated time structure. This time
dealing with actual time travel — sort of. If you really liked the idea of
Inception, you might feel at home here.

Let's tackle the elephant in the room: the movie will hurt your brain. The
time-travelling mechanism presented is not intuitive and has a lot of fun but
finicky implications. This is definitely the most complex time-travel movie I've
seen, maybe tying with [Primer].

I actually enjoy those kind of movies. At least if I'm able to figure out most
of it, or if it's explained at some point. I managed to follow pretty well, and
fortunately because not much is laid out explicitly. The movie never stops to do
a play-by-play of what transpired, and the criticism I've heard is that it left
some people stranded during the viewing. Fortunately, the movie is still
enjoyable as-is (you can still follow), but if you want pure actions, there are
better flicks.

[Primer]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primer_(film)

So all in all, a unique viewing experience.

## Skeleton Soldier Couldn't Defend The Dungeon (up to chapter 109)

![](skeleton-soldier.png)

Skeleton Soldier (for short) is a another [webtoon manhwa] I've been devouring
one month or two ago, catching up to the current state of publication.

It's about... a skeleton soldier, that dies, but is reborn. Except this time,
he's some sort of RPG protagonist in his own world. He can level and acquire
abilities. If he dies, he travels back in time to start again, but keeping his
level and abilities.

It's an interesting premise, and the webtoon does it justice by introducing
interesting characters that kriss-kross through the skeleton's multiple
lifetimes, and setting up engaging mysteries about the universe.

The fact that skeleton can die is a big plus story-wise. Even though death is
merely a setback, the skeleton is invested in his "lifetime", typically building
relationships with other characters who will forget all about him if he dies.
He's also typically trying to achieve something. The hero actually being able to
die and be meaningfully set back does avoid the "plot armor" problem where the
hero always succeeds.

As for having a skeleton as a main protagonist, that's also an interesting
choice. It's ultimately not a huge deal (this would have worked just as well
with a human), but it's an interesting twist that the story does exploit.

The premise and setting bears a lot of resemblance to [Solo Leveling], a webtoon
I'm currently reading (review next time, probably). I'd say that from what I
have read so far (~ 70 chapters), Skeleton Soldier has the more interesting and
intricate story. Solo leveling being very enjoyable still.

[Solo Leveling]: https://levelingsolo.com/

Very recommended if you're into RPG, isekai or action manga/manhwa at all.

## Rick & Morty (Season 1 & 2)

Finally, I'm giving the phenomenon a shot, watching it with Sasha (it's a
rewatch for her).

It's good. It's weird. It's definitely somewhat unique. I'm not sure it hypes me
up incredibly however.

The problem might be the episodic nature. I like stories, and most episodes
don't really move the story or the characters forward.

The show is notoriously absurd or over-the-top sometimes, and while it's not
something I generally enjoy, it works okay here.

Ultimately, what I liked the most so far where the really dark moments, where
characters hit rock bottom (in a way that is not just implied to be funny and
temporary) and have to live with the consequence of their actions.

Episode 6 of season 1 is the best example of that, and is my favorite Rick &
Morty moment by far. Season 2 also built something like that, but it's up to
season 3 what to make of it.

The humor is okay by me, but if I were in for the laughs, I'd rather watch
Brooklyn 99 or The IT Crowd or How I Met Your Mother.

I wonder about the popularity of this. Is it for others like it is for me, that
the enjoyable but light nature of the show, punctuated by unexpected gut punches
that makes it memorable?

## The Boys (Season 1 & 2)

![](the-boys.jpg)

Finally, a show gave me a reason to check out that Prime video I have since
forever!

In this show, superheroes are real, and they're a big business. In addition to
being a contractor police force, the whole Marvel-style
cinema/comics/merchandising complex is in full swing. All the big names are
being managed by a megacorp called Vought. Unfortunately, not all superheroes
are as nice as it seems, and many are assholes and downright psychopaths.

The destiny of the main protagonist is changed when his girlfriend is caught in
an "accident" involving a superhero, and a man called Butcher offers his help to
take down the responsible superhero.

One thing to be remarked about the show is how it situates itself in the
zeitgeist. It has Marvel-style hero mania, sexual harrassment scandals,
marketing-driven diversity, social justice, political polarization, christian
fundamentalists, using terrorism as an excuse to do nefarious shit, and even
meme-based opinion campaigns. And mostly, the show makes it work.

The show is adopted from a comic book, but from what I've read, it takes a lot
of liberty with the original material — I think its situation within the
zeitgeist is an example of that. The original comic started publishing in 2006,
two full years before the first Iron Man movie (arguably the first modern MCU
movie).

The first season was my favourite of the two. The story is more straightforward.
The second season ... I have mixed feelings about. Well, it was very good, and
very enjoyable to watch. Some small elements felt off, however. In particular,
it felt that sometimes "world-level" happenings are being pushed to drive the
plot forward in a way that is unsubtle, and not particulary credible — typically
involving fickle public opinion. Some choices were questionable to me. Did the
plot really need to involve *actual* nazis (not neo-nazis, but 1940s nazis)?

However, the second season also pulls no punches. The third episode could
basically have been a season finale, and it gets crazier after that. I thought
the ending was a bit of a cope (an easy way out, if you will), but eh.

Shoutout to Karl Urban, whose Butcher is fantastic. And shoutout to the writers
for making Hughie not too annoying. After watching the first episode, I expected
him to be a painful drag of a protagonist, but the writers dosed his reticence
just right, so this didn't happen.

What else? Anti-heroes, obviously, in a very literal sense. Morally gray, as
they are not always entirely morally upstanding. Butcher, in particular, has to
deal with his demons.

Well worth watching, feels very fresh.

## Dorohedoro

![](dorohedoro.jpg)

Dorohedoro takes place in some sort of slum called "the hole" that is connected
to a magical realm. Sorcerers regularly come out to "practice" (which mostly
involves transforming, killing and mangling innocent holes denizen). The
protagonist Caiman lost all his memories and his head was changed to that of a
reptilian, presumably due to such an encounter. Together with his cook friend
Nikaido, he tries to reclaim his memory and original form. Doing so, he'll face
against a gang of magicians including a dude that turns everything into
mushroom.

Dorohedoro is kinda crazy, but in a good way. I liked the humor and the action,
and for a universe that is so non-sensical, the world-building is suprisingly
solid. The story is solid, with clues to the main mystery being given
throughout.

I also greatly appreciated that the anime dumps you in its universe, giving you
information as necessary instead of doing tedious information dumps.

My only regret is that after the 13 episodes first season, it feels like we have
barely scratched the main story, and a second season hasn't been confirmed (yet?).
