---
title: Reviews 10
layout: post
---

Part of the [Reviews Series](/reviews).

---

## Overgeared
- Webtoon
- Up to chapter 57

![](overgeared.jpg)

Bunch of new webtoons this time around, still in the same "leveling" genre. It's
crazy that there does not seem to be a name for those, even though they're all
build around the same mold. It's crazy to me how they seemingly *all* seem to
feature these floaty alert panels with skills, quests, etc - even when the story
doesn't not really demand it. Sometimes the protagonist is the only one to see
them. I'm really curious where this all started.

Anyhow, I'll try to be brief as most of these are not really adding saying of
substance. It's mostly mindless entertainement still.

Overgeared, then. Basically, this time the protagonist is a craftsman, who
manages to become very powerful (mostly) through his items.

The protagonist also distinguished itself by not being the most savvy, and often
greedy in a base way. This is generally the setup for some light comedy.
Personally, I didn't think it works all that well, but it's not too bothersome
either. A fairly standard entry in the genre.

## Omniscient Reader's Viewpoint
- Webtoon
- Up to chapter 36

The premise of this one is quite interesting: the protagonist has been the only
redear of a light novel for years, depicting a sort of apocalypse where
otherwordly entities descend on earth and make humans compete for them
(featuring of course, skills & leveling).

As our man finishes the light novel, the scenario it describes comes to passes.
He now has a very important advantage: he already knows what will happen. This
includes the rules of this brave new world, but also specific events that will
happen.

Interestingly, the light novel did have a hero, which is also present in the
story. One cool consequence is that the protagonist must ensure the hero
survives, as the light novel followed the hero, and future events are tied to
him. It's by no mean the only cool idea in a series that I found a bit smarter
than average.

There aren't that many chapters out currently, but I'm curious to see where this
will go.

## I Am The Sorcerer King
- Webtoon
- Up to chapter 123

So, everybody levels to fight appearing monsters, blah blah blah. This time the
protagonist is a reincarnated sorcerer, from a dimension where people can grow
in power but do not level in the same way.

This is as pure as a power trip as I've ever seeen, featuring a mixing of the
genres, between RPG skills, non-RPG magic, and even science. Suffice to say that
at some point, magical nuclear weapons are being fired.

## The Motivation Hacker
- Book, by Nick Winter

I read this book because it was quoted extensively from [Gateless], and those
quotes were some of the most interesting parts of that book.

It was honestly a bit of a letdown. Not that the book is bad. In fact, I'm glad
I read it, and found it generally interesting and relevant. But it wasn't what I
had imagined / hoped for.

I hoped for a book that would outline very precisely a great number of
"motivation hacks" that could be called on. In reality, there are less than I
hoped (12-15 or so) and they aren't discussed in any great depth. The book is
mostly concerned with how the authors used those in practice — which is
legitimately impressive and inspiring. Those still can be a game changer, but I
had passing familiarity with most of them.

What I hoped beyond that was for a more technical angle, in particular with
regards to the psychology of these motivation tricks.

Another objection I have is that very clearly the author is someone that was
very accomplished to begin with, before tackling all the challenges in the book.
A great part of what makes those hacks successful, in my opinion, is the
groundwork laid by a consistent productivity habit. This means the techniques
might be less effective than it seems in people who do not have this record of
accomplishment and consistency.

Still, if you cannot immediately name some motivation hacks and you're in the
mood to get some motivation into you to tackle some important projects, this is
recommended reading.

[Gateless]: /reviews-9/#gateless

## The Laws of Human Nature
- Book, by Robert Greene

I started this, but I do not know if I will finish it.

It's not the first book by Robert Greene that I read. I've read [Mastery] and
[The 48 Laws of Power][48]. I started [The Art of Seduction][Seduction], but did
not finish for exactly the same reason as this book.

Greene is a pretty good author in my estimation. He writes well, in an
authoritative style whose old-fashionedness gives him charm. It is well
researched, and the historical examples are interesting.

My problem with Greene is that the books are positionned as advice or education (or
to use a less charitable term, self-help). Personally, I find it hard to get
something very useful out of them besides inspiration.

The strange thing is, Greene is generally correct. And when the ideas he
proposes veer machievellian (in the sense of [the original][prince]), the
perspectives he proposes need to be considered.

That being said, the ideas offered are rarely thought-provoking (at least I've
you are somewhat well-read), and difficult to operationalize.

Let's talk about "The Laws of Human Nature" in particular. In it, Greene
examines fundamental human tendencies - how they can betray us, how they can be
exploited (by ourselves or others, for good or for evil).

In the first few chapters, he recommends such things as listening deeply to
others, noticing when body language disagress with spoken language and setting
the tone for your team. All excellent ideas, albeit hardly anything I haven't
heard before. The problem is that first, nobody would disagree that these are
good ideas, and second - even once you've resolved to, for instance, listen
deeply - how do you actually remember to do it in the heat of conversation?

That being said, the book is entertaining to some extent, albeit massive. But
don't expect too much in the way of terms of wisdom that you can act on.

Though, I am compelled to add... I appreciate there is a public for which
Greene's perspective is foreign, and would be profusely useful. In a sense, I
think too much like the author.

[Mastery]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13589182-mastery
[48]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1303.The_48_Laws_of_Power
[Seduction]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/20995.The_Art_of_Seduction
[prince]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Prince

## The Age of Em
- Book, by Robin Hanson

A vision of the future, which purports to be (more) based on scientific theories
than published alternatives. The author acknowledged this is very much only a
tiny possibility for the future, but at least one that does not seem grossly
contradictory with current scientific knowledge, both in the exact and social
sciences.

Personally - I found myself thoroughly bored at the initial description of that
future. I might have been unfair to the book, as Hanson explicitly warns that he
will first describe the end point, then justify why he thinks this endpoint is
plausible — which is arguably the interesting part.

That being said, I don't know if I'll pick this again. Truth is this was a
moonshot, not something I'm fundamentally interested in. A big reason I gave it
a shot, was that Hanson is famous for [his blog] and in particular his writing
on biases and signalling.

I have other books that interest me more, but I needed some audiobooks to listen
to while running, and this proved easier to find than some other things on my
list.

[his blog]: https://www.overcomingbias.com/

## Basic Economics
- Book, by Thomas Sowell

Basic Economics proved a tad too basic for me. It's essentially a watered down
version of the political economy course I got in my first year at uni. It's well
written, but it's a bad fit for me.

I however very much recommend following [the twitter account][sowell] that
tweets out quips quoted from Thomas Sowell's books. They're biting, usually
true, and often about simple ideas that are often misunderstood.

[sowell]: https://twitter.com/ThomasSowell

## Great Pretender
- Anime
- Seasons 1 & 2

![](great-pretender.webp)

Wow! Here's an anime that felt different. From the international setting and
bright pastel color palette to the amazing story-telling — there were so much
that was unique about this one.

It follows a group of conmen in a series of ambitious cons. Twists abounds! It's
almost a trick — there are enough twists that it becomes difficult to call any
one of them.

I'm not going to dither much — just watch this one.

## Tomb Raider King
- Webtoon
- Up to chapter 186

The pitch of this one is that suddenly "tombs" start to appear in the world,
holding sentient relics which can bestow their owner great powers, though the
relics generally try to take advantage of their owners.

The hero is part of a tomb raiding team, gets betrayed, but by the magic of
scenario, gets sent back 15 years in the past, at the start of the relic
phenomenon. There, he can use his knowledge to get ahead.

Oh, and, *of course* he also gain special abilities that he can level. Duh.

The setup leads to inventive situations, exploiting all kind of relics' power.
The story does not try to be *too* clever or overly consistent, but the
relentless action helps suppress potential suspension of disbelief.

The biggest difference from other webtoon however is that the main character is
kind of a dick. He's not evil in the sense of murdering people in cold blood,
but he's not a nice person either, never hesitating to use other people to his
advantage. Story-wise, that's not particularly good or bad, but it's different.

Entertaining enough, but doesn't crack my top list.

## The Untethered Soul
- Book, by Michael Alan Singer

It's starting to be a theme, but here is yet another book and started and put
back almost immediately. I had picked up the recommendation from somewhere and
it's saving grace was that I was able to find an audiobook on it easily.

It's a book about mindfulness, but the start of it felt rather very basic, and
offering zero insights to me.

If you're looking for books on mindfulness, I'd recommend [The Power of Now] and
[You Are Here]. The first one is more "mystical", but quite interersting, while
the second one is a down to earth guide to more mental calm.

Some quotes of the *The Power of Now* made it into my [Unconstraining] post from
way back.

[You Are Here]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/22878980-you-are-here
[The Power of Now]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6708.The_Power_of_Now
[Unconstraining]: /unconstraining

## Beastars
- Anime
- Season 1 & 2

![](beastars.jpg)

In a world of anthropomorphized animals, a socially awkward wolf falls in love
with a spunky rabbit.

The animals are ostensibly vegetarian (interestingly - not vegan), but the
carnivores' instincts leads to what can only be described as "frayed race
relationships". The whole thing is also quite Japanese to boot, including a
hefty dose of what I'd call "societal cynicism" (though they might not see it
the same way, I suppose).

Anyway, this setup speak little to the goodness of the show. And good it is. I'd
say its strength are really unusual and highly interesting characters.
Recommended.

I thought season 2, while still quite good, was a bit weaker. The ending, in
particular, left me super perplexed. I'm not sure why the director believed
going in the chosen direction would make for a good, engaging or satisfying
conclusion to the storyline.

## Better Call Saul
- TV
- Season 5

![](better-call-saul.jpg)

Better Call Saul is as good as ever. I haven't written about the show before,
but I've been a fan of the first four seasons.

One thing I love about BCS is how, on the surface, not much is happening, but
thanks to the incredible acting, you perceive that the characters are going
through all sorts of emotions.

Or at least, it feels like not much is happening. This is not an action show,
but the plot is engrossing, and frankly excellent.

Better Call Saul is of course a Breaking Bad's spinoff. I always felt Better
Call Saul was a notch above. It's been a while since I saw Breaking Bad, so who
knows. It might also be that Breaking Bad is much more conflicted, in a sense.
You want to root for Walt, but you also dislike him (and the same is true, to a
lesser extent, for Jesse). Better Call Saul, despite having plenty of conflict,
is easier to enjoy.

Anyway, this review is not doing justice to the show at all, but trust me, it's
worth your time.

## WandaVision
- TV
- Season 1

We started watching this because so many people were talking about it. I was
hoping it was going something a bit un-marvelish (it's about Wanda the Scarlet
Witch and Vision the android - MCU characters) - and the [trailer][wandatrailer]
was intriguing.

[wandatrailer]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sj9J2ecsSpo

However, in the end, it wasn't to be. The trailer essentially gives you the plot
of the first three episodes, which are parodies of old TV shows, with ominous
signs interspersed.

I was surprised to find out that quite a few reviewers found these parodies
delightful... I personally found them to be a bit of a drag. If you like old
shows, go watch them directly, it's bound to be much better — the jokes weren't
particularly great either.

However, if you make it past the first three episodes, the intrigue kicks into
high gear and things get interesting. That being said, what you're left with is
a typical Marvel experience: entertaining, eminently watchable, but not
particularly profound, fascinating, or delightful.

While the show entertains until the end, I think the ending peters out a little
bit. Contrary to one might have hoped, there's very little mystery being
unveiled (or rather, the mystery is disappointing). Whatever twists there are,
are ... unexpected, but not in a particularly good way. This is no Westworld.

Not a must watch, but if you're bored and like the MCU, then maybe.

## Cobra Kai
- TV
- Season 1 & 2

![](cobra-kai.jpg)

Cobra Kai is absolutely delightful. This 34-years-after sequel of *The Karate
Kid* offers to follow Johnny Lawrence — the main antagonist of the movie, and
rival of hero Daniel LaRusso — as he picks back Karate and resumes his rivarly
with Daniel, involving a bunch of local kids along the way.

That's a cute idea, straigtht from a [*How I Met Your Mother* episode][himym]
episode. And if you watch [the trailer][cobrakaitrailer], cute and naive and
goofy is what it looks like.

But people, this thing has depth.

It is, still, in a sense a very innocent show. Innocent is probably not the
right word, but it has this earnestnest that you don't see much in TV shows
these days — the stuff the original was made of. There's good reasons we see
little of it. It's been done successfully many time before, and if you fail at
earnestness, then the failure always looks all the more ridiculous and
out-of-touch.

Cobra Kai wears its earnestness on its sleeve, but, surprisingly does not seek
to subvert it, at least not in the usual way. Instead of sticking to the usual
manichean schema (hero vs villain — whoever that may be), the show is
surprisingly nuanced. Both Johny and Daniel are often wrong-headed hotheads, but
both are essentially good people.

The usual subversion of the classical story is that the (anti-)hero is an
asshole too. Here it's that everyone is human. That sounds adorkable and a bit
too warm and fuzzy — which makes the show's ability to pull it out so much more
impressive.

The show really runs with that theme, and it extends far wider than just Johnny
and Daniel. One particularly interesting way in which it does this is by
recasting the events of the original movie as essentially traumatic for our two
protagonists. While Daniel "wins" in the movie, he still remember being a
bullied kid. And of course, Mr Miyagi's (his wise Japanese sensei in the movie)
teachings become the cornerstone of his life philosophy. But Johnny sees Daniel
as up-an-comer who stole his girlfriend and his karate title — an endeavour in
which he had invested his whole personal (and fragile) self-esteem.

That brings to maybe the thing that makes me the most uneasy about the show —
it's reliance on misunderstandings between characters. Because everyone involved
is essentially good, it often feels like if everyone could sit together and say
their piece, most issues would be solved.

Normally I hate misunderstanding-driven plots. Romeo & Juliet is hot garbage in
my book. The show walks a tight line regarding misunderstandings. Characters do
sometimes talk things out. Things never spiral out of control on the back of
increasing misunderstandings. But the misunderstandings keep happening,
necessary to carry a conflict that perhaps can't sustained solely on the basis
of the philosophical disagreements. I must say that so far I'm impressed with
the show's ability to perform this balancing act. I just hope they can keep it
up for the next three seasons!

I'm not sure you'll be as impressed by Cobra Kai as I was (though I sure hope
so), but if you enjoyed The Karate Kid, you certainly need to try this one.

**Season 2**

All of the above was written before watching season 2. I think season 2 holds up
pretty well. It definitely keeps toeing the line with misunderstandings - but
nothing show-ruining. Having actually seen two episodes of the third season
already, I'm very curious as to where this takes two characters that feature
prominently in season 2 — namely Kreese and Tory.

I was surprised by the attempt to also flesh these characters, given them a more
sympathetic side (and early in season 3, more backstory). This is particulary
true for Kreese, which the shows sets up as a clear-cut antagonist, playing
ominous music every occasion it gets. It's interesting and certainly not what
you expect. Though I must say compared to something like Game of Thrones, where
you actually get to "see" the inner thought process of "bad" characters, it can
sometimes feel a bit weird. Curious to see what season 3 does with them.

[himym]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nrzqc7F-Ans
[cobrakaitrailer]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xCwwxNbtK6Y

## Mushoku Tensei (Jobless Reincarnation)
- Anime
- Season 1

![](mushoku-tensei.jpg)

Easily one of my favourite anime of the winter season (a tie with Attack on
Titans, probably). It's not exactly surprising, it's about a loser who dies and
gets revived in a fantasy world as a fully-intelligent toddler. That just sound
like all these webtoon I keep reviewing.

Besides plot affinity, the thing is extremely well done. It looks georgeous.
It's too short (only 11 episodes, though a second season should come later this
year), but the pacing is tight. The show doesn't repeat itself, nor does it
longer too long in one place. Character development is had.

Gigguk published excellent [video praise] for the anime, which I wholeheartedly
agree with.

[video praise]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tDh5Us8rl80

Truly, one of the better isekai in recent memory.

## Re:Zero
- Anime
- Season 2, pt. 2
- previously: [S1](/even-more-anime/#rezero), [S1, pt. 1][s1pt1]

[s1pt1]: /reviews-8/#rezero-season-2-part-1

In my review of [part 1][s1pt1], I said I was unsure what to make of this
season, that it would entirely depend on how part 2 delivers on the setup from
part 1.

Well folks, I'm disappointed.

Just like I feared, cutting in the middle with the balls hanging in the air was
a terrible idea. I couldn't understand what was going on for the first few
episodes, and absolutely no summary (explicit or implicit) was offered.

This was made worse by the fact that the plot is needlessly convoluted. My major
beef is with the characters' motivations. Despite all the revelations, I still
have no idea what Roswal wants or stands for. It's not even a mystery that works
well — there are multiple conversations where this could (should, really) come
out, but somehow Subaru never asks the right questions. He doesn't even seem to
think he's missing anything. Beatrice's motivation is paper-thin and frankly
dumb.

The author's brain just seem wired to another dimension (like all adaptations,
the question remains whether the fault lies with the original or the
adaptation). A few times I realized that something I had taken to be some
harmless exposition was actually an important piece of context — and you were
apparently supposed to get it. Again, this is made worse by the fact that the
show makes no effort whatsoever to help you make sense of things.

Honestly, this point it feels lazy, almost sleazy. The mystery feels artificial,
added on just for effect, not as something that makes sense within the plot.

Add to this a bunch of completely nonsensical (and frankly boring) speeches, and
the result quite tepid.

There are some good part to the story though. Emilia finally gets some character
development. The ending does feel satisfying.

## Log Horizon
- Anime
- Season 3
- previously: [S1 & S2](/every-anime/#log-horizon)

I'm not even disappointed, I'm devastated.

I've told many people that Log Horizon is one of my favourite anime. I evend
said in my review: "The only bad thing about Log Horizon is that it is
unfinished."

Well I jinxed it, because this third season is absolutely terrible and devoid of
the charm of the previous instalments.

Mostly, the show commits the gravest sin of violating "show, don't tell". We are
being told stuff con-stant-ly. We are being told how characters feels. How
decisions will impact them. There is absolutely no good reason to do this.

The arcs are pretty boring too. It feels like there's very little at stake. The
pacing is completely unbalanced: the first 5 episodes or so are characters
talking and thinking without any action whatsoever. There is no overarching
theme to the season.

Game mechanics still feature, but in a pretty uninimaginative way, and without
the accompanying broad consequences on the world that made the first two seasons
so interesting.

Now, to be fair, Sasha watched the first two seasons recently and claims that
season 2 is much more like this than I remember. I do remember a couple
excellent episodes, but it's been like 6 years at this point.

## That Time I Got Reincarnated as a Slime
- Anime
- Season 2
- previously: [S1](/even-more-anime/#that-time-i-got-reincarnated-as-a-slime)

Slime is just being slime: a zero-calories snack, entertaining but not
particularly impactful.

In a sense that's too bad. You just know Rimuru the slime can't lose, and that
does undercut the show's attempt at drama. Frankly, I would have loved for the
show to go dark all of a sudden, but it was not the be.

<details><summary>Mild <b>spoiler</b>.</summary>

The show does in fact get "dark", but not in tone. Mass-murder is just done
matter-of-factly, but the show is still on the same trajectory: the rise of the
ever-growing, ever-more-powerful alliance of Rimuru's band of nice monsters.
</details>

## The Promised Neverland
- Anime
- Season 2
- previously: [S1](/even-more-anime/#the-promised-neverland)

Season 2 cuts on the three-level deep plots, and adds some action/adventure. It
was generally solid, ... but something felt missing.

Maybe it was because this is only 11 episodes long. Even though the episodes are
well-done, you can't help but feel rushed. I'm not incredibly satisfied with
this explanation — we should not seek length for length's sake. But I'm not
entirely sure what they should have done to add weight and emotional impact to
the plot.

My friends had told me that the show cut some arcs form the story, but
apparently [the issues run deeper][tpn-issues] and, at the very least, the
show's screenwriters seem unsatisfied with the show's direction.

[tpn-issues]: https://comicbook.com/anime/news/the-promised-neverland-season-2-bad-anime-credit/

## Dr Stone: Stone Wars
- Anime
- Season 2
- previously: [S1](/reviews-5/#dr-stone)

I continue to very much like Dr Stone. The second season is a continuation of
the story of the first season, and the themes and vibes are similar.

I stand by what I said in [my season 1 review](/reviews-5/#dr-stone), so you can
go read that if you're interested.

## Attack on Titans
- Anime
- Season 4, part 1
- previously: [S1](/every-anime/#attack-on-titan),
  [S2](/more-anime/#attack-on-titan-season-2), [S3
  pt. 1](/even-more-anime/#attack-on-titans-season-3-part-1),
  [S3 pt. 2](/reviews-4/#attack-on-titans-season-3-part-2)

![](attack-on-titans.webp)

Season 3 felt like a lull, but season 4 delivers an electroshock. Holy shit! I
didn't expect this final season to be one of the best of the winter season, but
it was, and easily at that.

The story is tight, and engrossing from the start. Things feel fresh, due in
part to a multi-years time skip, and the decision to center the first few
episodes on the introduction of completely new characters that have an important
role to play in this final season.

This is Attack on Titans at its best, not only are the action scenes as good as
ever (although perhaps there will be too little of them for some people), but
the season tells an interesting story in its own right, and the final pieces of
the puzzle finally fall into place.

Also, a master class in how to do character's motivations and mystery right.
Take that, Re:Zero!

All in all, I'm glad that Attack on Titans probably won't end up in the "Game of
Throne bucket" of good shows that are hard to recommend because of their shitty
ending.

Also, you've got to admire the gall of the studio, who only let out that this
was *part 1* of "Attack on Titans: **The Final Season**" after the last episode
was released. (At that point, most people's money was on there being a movie that
would wrap up the story.) What a troll.

## The WoW Diary
- Book by John Staats

It's no secret that World of Warcraft is close to my heart. I sank countless
hours in it as a teenager, and I even dabbled in private servers programming.

As such, The WoW Diary is an invaluable (and in fact, one of the only) source of
information on how the game was actually made, written by someone who worked on
it. John Staats designed and build the looks of most of the dungeons in the
original game.

I'm not sure a review makes much sense, but I thought the book was great, given
my interest in the topic. I'm not sure someone who doesn't really care about how
games are made would find it interesting.

Here a few things I learned from reading the book that also surprised me:

- Despite Blizzard's fame as one of the top video game studios, and one comitted
  to quality at that, the working conditions seemed terrible. The team was
  crunching on and off for *years*. The salary is said to be only competitive
  after bonuses, of which there were little while the game was still in
  development.

- The flip side is how familial the structure felt small and familial, and
  internal mobility was not only possible but common. Many if not most of the
  slots that opened in the team were filled directly from the <abbr
  title="Quality Assurance">QA</abbr> department.

- I had in mind that the team that made the game was relatively small, but in
  fact it did number some 80-90 people towards the end of development, among
  which at least half were developers. There was also a sizeable number of 3D
  artists, texture artists, item designers, quest designers, etc. I wonder if
  the same work could be done by fewer people today or if it still would require
  around the same number of people.

- The team did not use version control until the tail end of development! Long
  periods of "broken build" is a common refrain in the book.

- The labor of some of the non-developers workforce looked to me like it was
  excruciatingly manual and repetitive. There were some pretty impressive
  in-house tools, but getting new features in those was apparently a struggle.
  To me, hiring four "helping hands" instead of a new tool developer seems like
  an obvious oversight.

## Casablanca
- Movie

This is rated by some as the best movie of all times. I'm not sure it's all
that, but the movie's reputation is well deserved - it has aged remarkably
gracefully.

Instead of listening to me talk about it, go watch this video on Humphrey Bogart
— it'll make you want to watch some of his movies.

<iframe width="720" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/dVs4-91xduY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
