---
title: Insights From "The Denial of Death"
layout: post
---

[The Denial of Death][wiki] is book by Ernest Becker that earned the Pulitzer
for non-ficiton in 1974. The basic premise of the book is that man is trapped in
between his "creatureliness" and "symbolic self". Consciousness has made man
aware of his own powers, but also of his miserable creatureliness and his
destiny to die.

I didn't read the book, but found a lot of gems in
this [compilation of selected quotes][quotes] made by Taylor Pearson. I also
drew from the [Wikipedia page][wiki].

[wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Denial_of_Death
[quotes]: https://taylorpearson.me/book-review/denial-death-summary-quotes/

Below is a summary of some interesting points made by the book.

## The Urge to Heroism

Our motivations have often more to do with the need to achieve than with the
matter at hand. Making a killing in business or on the battlefield frequently
has less to do with economic need or political reality than with the need for
assuring ourselves that we have achieved something of lasting worth.

In man a working level of narcissism is inseparable from self-esteem, from a
basic sense of self-worth.

Urge to heroism is natural, and to admit it honest. For everyone to admit it
would probably release such pent-up force as to be devastating to societies.

Societies, except primitive ones, cannot provide to men a path to heroism.

Christianity achieved it to some extent, by mere participation: it could take
the simple and the mighty, and make them all secure heroes, simply by taking a
step back from the world into another dimension: that of heaven. Christianity
took creature consciousness — the thing man most wanted to deny — and made it
the very condition for his cosmic heroism.

But humanity's traditional "hero-systems", such as religion, are no longer
convincing in the age of reason. Science attempts to serve as an immortality
project (see below), something it can never do, because it is unable to provide
agreeable, absolute meanings to human life.

To become conscious of what one is doing to earn his feeling of heroism is the
main self-analytic problem of life.

The crisis of modern society is precisely that the youth no longer feel heroic
in the plan for action that their culture has set up.

Modern man cannot find his heroism in everyday life any more, as men did in
traditional societies just by doing their daily duty of raising children,
working, and worshipping. He needs revolutions and wars and "continuing"
revolutions to last when the revolutions and wars end. That is the price modern
man pays for the eclipse of the sacred dimension. When he dethroned the ideas of
soul and God he was thrown back hopelessly on his own resources.

## The Immortality Project

Since humanity has a dualistic nature consisting of a physical self and a
symbolic self, we are able to transcend the dilemma of mortality through
heroism, by focusing our attention mainly on our symbolic selves.

This symbolic self-focus takes the form of an individual's "immortality project"
(or "causa sui project"), which is essentially a symbolic belief-system that
ensures oneself is believed superior to physical reality. By successfully living
under the terms of the immortality project, people feel they can become heroic
and, henceforth, part of something eternal; something that will never die as
compared to their physical body. This, in turn, gives people the feeling that
their lives have meaning, a purpose, and are significant in the grand scheme of
things.

The arbitrariness of human-invented immortality projects makes them naturally
prone to conflict. When one immortality project conflicts with another, it is
essentially an accusation of 'wrongness of life', and so sets the context for
both aggressive and defensive behavior. Each party will want to prove its belief
system is superior, a better way of life. Thus these immortality projects are
considered a fundamental driver of human conflict.

## Anxiety, Fear of Death and Illusions

In nature fear and anxiousness improve survival, hence today we still are
anxious, even though the environment does not justify it.

Man works against his fragility by seeking living experiences, moving towards
more life. Or he plunges in self-absorbing activities. Fear of death can be
ignored and sometimes absorbed into the life-expanding process: this is called
*repression*.

How can people stand the really demonic activity of working behind those hellish
ranges in hotel kitchens, the frantic whirl of waiting on a dozen tables at one
time, the madness of the travel agent’s office at the height of the tourist
season, or the torture of working with a jack-hammer all day on a hot summer
street. The answer is that the craziness of these activities is exactly that of
the human condition. They are "right" us because the alternative is natural
desperation. The daily madness of these jobs is a repeated vaccination against
the madness of the asylum. Look at the joy and eagerness with which workers
return from vacation to their compulsive routines. They plunge into their work
with equanimity and lightheartedness because it drowns out something more
ominous. Men have to be protected from reality.

Which poses another gigantic problem to a sophisticated Marxism (or universal
basic income): What is the nature of the obsessive denials of reality that a
Utopian society will provide to keep men from going mad?

When the awareness of mortality dawns beyond the frenetic activity, it emerges in pure
form. Things like psychotic break can issue when repression is no longer possible.

Man is horrified by his own basic animal condition, a condition that, especially
as a child, he cannot understand and that, as an adult, he cannot accept.

There is a need for illusion — without being cynical. There is a great deal of
falseness and self-deception in the cultural immortality project, but there is
also the necessity of this project. Man needs a second world, a world of humanly
created meaning, a new reality that he can live, dramatize, nourish himself in.
We need new convincing illusions that enable us to feel heroic in ways that are
agreeable.

Becker does not provide any definitive answer as to what these illusions might
be, mainly because he believes that there is no perfect solution. Instead, he
hopes that gradual realization of humanity's innate motivations, namely death,
can help to bring about a better world.

## Sex, Love and the Body

It is difficult to have sex without guilt: the body casts a shadow on the
person's inner freedom / real self that — through sex — is being forced into a
standardized, mechanical, biological role.

Love lets us feel that the other person recognizes and respects or
symbolic self even as they see us at our most animalistic.

The body is the clear problem over which he must triumph in order to build a
cultural personality at all, as it is the clear enemy in establishing our
divinity.

## Character and Reality

Character is a neurotic defense against despair, and shedding character means
risking death and madness. To see reality, one must die and be reborn, which
means shedding character.

Kierkegaard: it's good to open toward new possibility and choice, to be able to
face anxiety. To be closed is evil, it means shutting out revelations and giving
up on reality.

The depressed person avoids the possibility of independence and more life
precisely because these are what threaten him with destruction and death. He
holds on to the people who have enslaved him in a network of crushing
obligations, belittling interaction, precisely because these people are his
shelter, his strength, his protection against the world.

In the prison of one's character one can pretend and feel that he is somebody,
that the world is manageable, that there is a reason for one's life, a ready
justification for one's action. To live automatically and uncritically is to be
assured of at least a minimum share of the programmed cultural heroics — what we
might call "prison heroism" — feeling like an insider.

## Authority & Delegated Power

If you admit that you are a creature, you accomplish one basic thing: you
demolish all your unconscious power linkages or supports. Each child grounds
himself in some power that transcends him. Usually it is a combination of his
parents, his social group, and the symbols of his society and nation. This is
the unthinking web of support which allows him to believe in himself, as he
functions on the automatic security of delegated powers.

Man has "an extreme passion for authority" and "wishes to be governed by
unrestricted force". People have "a longing to be hypnotized" by a leader
because they want to get back the magical protection and feeling of
belongingness that they enjoyed from their parents.

The leader is a creature of the group, as are his followers. The leader has no
more freedom to be himself, as he has to be a reflex of the group. The followers
give in the leader's commands but can always retain the feeling that these
commands are alien to them — the leader's responsibility. This can make people
guiltless, as they can imagine themselves temporary victims of the leader.

Man uses morality to get to a place of belongingness and perpetuation in the
universe. By conforming to the rules made by representatives of natural power
(leaders), his safe belongingness is assured. This is natural: we tell the child
when he is good so that he doesn’t have to be afraid.

This is the first way in which man attempts to overcome his own finitude and
unimportance.

## Heroic Gifts

The second way man attmepts to overcome his own finitude is by developing a
really valuable heroic gift, becoming extra-special.

If you are the average man you give your heroic gift to the society in which you
live, and you give the gift that society specifies in advance. If you are an
artist you fashion a peculiarly personal gift, the justification of your own
heroic identity, which means that it is always aimed at least partly over the
heads of your fellow men. After all, they can’t grant the immortality of your
personal soul.

The social hero-system into which we are born marks out paths for our heroism,
paths to which we conform, to which we shape ourselves so that we can please
others, become what they expect us to be. And instead of working our inner
secret we gradually cover it over and forget it, while we become purely external
men, playing successfully the standardized hero-game into which we happen to
fall by accident, by family connection, by reflex patriotism, or by the simple
need to eat and the urge to procreate.

The real problem of man: to find his true talent, his secret gift, his
authentic vocation. This question may become so intolerable as to cause suicide
and flight in the rush of experiences.

A person spends years coming into his own, developing his talent, his unique
gifts, perfecting his discriminations about the world, broadening and sharpening
his appetite, learning to bear the disappointments of life, becoming mature,
seasoned—finally a unique creature in nature, standing with some dignity and
nobility and transcending the animal condition; no longer driven, no longer a
complete reflex, not stamped out of any mold. And then the real tragedy, as
André Malraux wrote in The Human Condition: that it takes sixty years of
incredible suffering and effort to make such an individual, and then he is good
only for dying.

## Repression and Partialization

The great lesson of Freudian psychology: that repression is normal
self-protection and creative self-restriction—in a real sense, man’s natural
substitute for instinct.

Life is impossible without *partialization*. What we call the well-adjusted man
has just this capacity to partialize the world for comfortable action.

Partializing the world is biting off what an animal can chew. Not to have this
talent means constantly biting off more than one can chew.

Why does the artist so often avoid clinical neurosis, when he is so much a
candidate for it because of his vivid imagination, his openness to the finest
and broadest aspects of experience, his isolation from the cultural world-view
that satisfies everyone else?

The answer is that he takes in the world, but instead of being oppressed by it
he reworks it in his own personality and recreates it in the work of art. The
neurotic is precisely the one who cannot create — the "artiste-manqué". We might
say that both the artist and the neurotic bite off more than they can chew, but
the artist spews it back out again and chews it over in an objectified way, as
an external, active, work project.
