---
title: "Effective Action is Really, Really Hard"
layout: post
---

Let's talk about politics.

Imagine there is a cause you care about. This could be poverty, global warming,
or something more humble like increasing the money your town spends on its
youth, or removing these annoying speed bumps from your street.

You would like to take action to push you cause forward. How do you do that?

The simplistic answer is you vote for someone that promises to do something
about your cause. This has many problems. First, some candidate must have
promised he would do something for your cause. Second, you must be inclined to
vote for this candidate, given the rest of his politics. Third, the candidate
must try to keep his word, and must manage to pass the policies you desire.

That's a lot of ifs, but we havent even got to the biggest objection: you
actually have no control over wether the candidate gets elected.

Here is a small scenario to illustrate: you live in a town with 1000 people, who
all vote; and there are two candidates. Let's suppose everyone votes at random,
except you. Your vote will make a difference, on average, one time out of a
1000.

Of course, people do not vote at random, but if you cannot influence their
decision, the result is the same. Overwhelmingly, your vote will not make a
difference. `*`

But there we have our solution: if you want to make a difference, you need to
**influence** people. In this way, you can have more weight than your allocated
1/1000.

In fact, the most interesting definition of *politics* from wiktionary is:

> Political maneuvers or diplomacy between people, groups, or organizations,
> especially involving power, influence or conflict.

So how do you influence people? The classical way is to make some kind of
organization with this purpose then hold awareness events, protests, maybe
distribute pamphlets, etc...

But this won't work, or won't work well enough. If you need to do this, you
cause is not well established, and people won't care enough to attend your
events. Your proselytism will midly annoy them at best.

The problem with voting for candidates is that you are not voting on issues. You
are (ideally...) voting for a program that takes a stance on many issues. Your
advocacy of your cause is probably not enough to shift the balance from one
candidate to another.

What else can you do? First, you could try to bypass the government entirely.
You could raise money for the poor or the town youth. But global warming and the
speed bumps? Forget it. Ultimately, most ways in which the world is fucked have
a fundametally political dimension (this time in the sense that they involve the
government, laws or international relationships).

What else can you do? Try to shape public opinion in favor of the candidate that
favors your cause. We're now in the realm of mediatic (or even mass-mediatic)
influence. Or, you could try to influence law- and policy-makers directly.

This is no longer something you can do on your spare time during the weekend.
You must be in the media and have some decisionary power. You must know
lawmakers and policymakers, and they have to value your input.

Should you dedicate your life to your pet cause, by engaging in a career only
tangentially related to it, in the hopes that you rise high enough to influence
decisions? Should you maybe even go into politics yourself? This all seems like
very bad life advice. If you pick a carreer for the wrong (extrinsic) reasons,
you probably wouldn't be good enough or successful enough at it to make a
difference!

What am I saying? Maybe we should accept that, in most political matters, we
have very little influence, hence possibility for action.

That may be revolting to a lot of you, and it runs quite contrary to the
zeitgeist that says we're all special snowflakes meant to change the world. But
search your feelings, and you'll know this to be true.

But I am not advocating for you to do nothing. Quite to the contrary, I would
encourage you to think deep and hard **about what you can actually do**. It's
likely that is much more than you realize, even if it's at a much more localized
level.

Many important changes depend on the "the right man" being there "at the right
place", and also at the right time.

To be the right man (or woman) at the right place, you first have to be at the
right place. Many carreer will afford you some influence at some level
(unfortunately, some carreer won't afford you any). Second, you have to be
*right*.

*Right* means be the right influence. It means looking at all the facts and
taking the best possible decisions. Because even if the thing you're weighting
on doesn't matter that much to you, it may matter a great deal to someone else.
It may even (gasp) be his own pet cause. You may want to listen to these people
(and to the other side, if there is one).

So if you want to change the world, first be realistic about what your activism
achieves (and if it does achieve something, by all means keep going), then start
looking at what you can actually do, even if it isn't related to that thing you
really want to change.

<!-------------------------------------------------------------------------><hr>

`*`: At this point, you may protest: "yes, but if everyone thinks like you,
people won't go voting and the bad guys will win!". Well, you're entirely
correct that this is a possible outcome. But that does not make my reasoning any
less true. If you think so, you're falling victim to the [Appeal to
Consequences] bias (aka wishful thinking): not believing something is true,
because it being true would have bad consequences.

Cases where the thing that is individually optimal (in this case, not bothering
to vote, since the impact is negligible) and the thing that is collectively
optimal (everyone taking voting seriously) are well known. They are a
generalization of the classical [Tragedy of the Commons] problem. This will be
the subject of a further blog post. If you're familiar with the [Prisoners'
Dilemna], that's also the same kind of idea, although at a reduced scale.

[Appeal to Consequences]: http://www.fallacyfiles.org/adconseq.html
[Tragedy of the Commons]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons
[Prisoners' Dilemna]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner%27s_dilemma
