---
title: "Chosen Tidbits 2"
layout: post
---

Previously: [June 2019]

[June 2019]: https://norswap.com/chosen-tidbits-1/

Yes, I know it's now February... Truth be told I forgot I was sitting on so much
material! Anyway, this content is evergreen, so enjoy. More to come!

---

[Venkatesh Rao on the aging mind](https://twitter.com/vgr/status/1145720241432887296)

Wisdom = cognitive reading glasses for the blurred thinking of an aging mind.
Like making bolder, rougher approximations and thereby getting to the right
answer 80% of the time faster than more cautious younger people who can
calculate faster to greater precision

---

[Visakan Veerasamy's memex - everything is
connected](https://twitter.com/visakanv/status/1097402088961695744)


[![Visa's memex](memex.jpg)](memex.jpg)

---

[Visa on Taste](https://twitter.com/visakanv/status/1088356040444239873)

When you worship your heroes, you distract them from the process that enables
them to make great work. Encourage the process, participate in the process.
They’re people too. Every creative mind is always yearning for more good minds
to play with.

“How do I develop taste?”

Well it shouldn’t be something you force yourself to do. What do you already
like? What are you already interested in? Explore that with a playful curiosity
and ask yourself what’s good, what’s not good. Have fun

“How do I produce a large body of work?”

A house is built one brick at a time. Make a brick. Then make another brick.
Then another. The secret is that you forget worrying about the house and enjoy
making bricks. It’s fun because you get to exercise and develop your taste

---

[Visa on Taste (2)](https://twitter.com/visakanv/status/1141043305007894528)

You can spend years arguing with idiots or you can spend years making friends.
The idiots aren’t going to be there for you when you need someone

<div class=nsep></div>

Every “utterance” (status, tweet, whatever) is a bit of an invitation, a bit of
a proposal. “Let’s play this game”. When strangers read the proposal accurately,
and support the game, a shared understanding develops. You can make friends this
way.

Some people deliberately choose to ignore, misread, disregard or denounce other
people’s bids. Others are outright clueless and don’t know how to play, and
sometimes cluelessness leads to worse bungling than deliberate malice

<div class=nsep></div>

I believe that taste is one of the most powerful, precious, fragile things in
the known Universe and should be cultivated accordingly

<div class=nsep></div>

I think you need to have taste to know how to make your own fun, and because
society disincentivizes the development of taste in the short run, people end up
having to buy mass-produced fun at a mark-up

---

[Smart vs Kind](http://visakanv.com/1000/0675-smart-vs-kind/)

Where does kindness enter the picture? Kindness nourishes (not coddles) fragile
things and makes them strong.

When I was younger, I truly believed that the best way to learn and grow and
progress was to subject everything to relentless scrutiny. To debate, argue,
attack from all sides. I still believe that that can be true in some cases, and
that individuals who are deeply committed to learning and intellectual
development can benefit tremendously from welcoming such behavior. Inviting
criticisms and takedowns. Soliciting negative feedback.

BUT, I’ve also grown to learn that there’s this whole other side to the picture.
What you see is NOT all there is. There’s a lot that you haven’t seen, that you
can’t see – and if you saw it with an open mind, you’d almost definitely revise
your model of reality.

I had a Kurt Cobain quote in mind – “Better to be hated for who you are than
loved for who you’re not”. It seemed radically profound at the time, but on
retrospect that’s entire oversimplistic thinking. We have more than two options.

Here’s what you miss if you’re unkind or non-kind: people opening up to you in
private.

---

[Caution On Bias Arguments](https://slatestarcodex.com/2019/07/17/caution-on-bias-arguments/)

> You say it’s important to overcome biases. So isn’t it hypocritical that
> you’re not trying to overcome whichever bias prevents you from realizing
> you’re wrong and I’m right?  
> — everybody

This is a general phenomenon: for any issue, you can think of biases that could
land people on one side or the other.

A is less biased. But B may be better informed.

---

[Two Ways To Get Better At
Something](https://www.raptitude.com/2019/06/two-ways-to-get-better-at-something/)

The gentle ramp vs the boot camp.

Sometimes one is right, sometimes the other.

---

[Seven Insight From Queueing Theory (PDF)](http://www.treewhimsy.com/TECPB/Articles/SevenInsights.pdf)

The response time is the wait time (spent in a queue) + the service time.

As the utilization of a service center grows, it becomes more likely that a
newly arriving job will have to wait because there are jobs ahead of it. In
general, the response time degradation is more pronounced the busier the
resource is. An approximate formula that describes this relationship is:

`ResponseTime = ServiceTime / (1 - Utilization)`

Visualized for different utilization percentages:

- 00%: 1x
- 33%: 1.5x
- 50%: 2x
- 75%: 4x
- 80%: 5x
- 90%: 10x

If you plot this, it will look like a hokey curve that rises up sharply as you
approach 100%.

Insight #1: The slower the service center, the lower the maximum utilization you
should plan for at peak load. (50% busy is a good max)

Insight #2: It’s very hard to use the last 15% of anything.

Insight #3: The closer you are to the edge, the higher the price for being
wrong: Going from 50 to 59% utilization is okay (2x to 3x), 90 to 99 is not (10x
to 100x).

Insight #4: Response time increases are limited by the number of jobs that can
wait without droping out of the queue.

Insight #5: Remember this is an average, not a maximum. Sometimes the wait time
will be small, sometimes huge depending on the queue buildup (i.e. on arrival
schedules and on utilisation in the time leading up to the request). This too
gets worse with higher utilization.

Insight #6: You could have multiple service centers to decrease the response
time. This works well until you reach high utilization: the response time stays
flat until you hit maybe 90% utilization, then rises much faster. Reason: there
usually is a free service center. When they start getting all busy, requests
still arrive at the same rate and build up faster.

---

[Mike Hearn - The Future of AI is Entertainement](https://blog.plan99.net/the-future-of-ai-is-entertainment-1841fbb400df)

Mike paints a picture of how AI can be used to generate all sort of contents
that can be put to work in entertainment (video games, movies, music, ...).
